# Bailey, Puritz, Senkow, et al. (2024)
Code base for Bailey, Puritz, Senkow, et al. "Expansion of profibrotic monocyte-derived alveolar macrophages in patients with persistent respiratory symptoms and radiographic abnormalities after COVID-19" (2024)

Monocyte-derived alveolar macrophages have been shown to drive lung injury and fibrosis in murine models and have been associated with pulmonary fibrosis in humans. As lung injury resolves, alveolar macrophages have been suggested to develop a phenotype that promotes lung repair, but data supporting this hypothesis are lacking. To test this in humans, we performed single-cell and cytokine profiling of the alveolar space in a cohort of 35 patients with post-acute sequelae of COVID-19 (PASC) who had persistent respiratory symptoms and abnormalities on chest computed tomography. We compared patients in this cohort whose lung injury improved on subsequent imaging to those who progressed, patients who required lung transplantation after COVID-19, and healthy controls. In patients with PASC, the abundance of monocyte-derived alveolar macrophages, their gene expression programs, and the levels of CCL2 in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid were associated with radiographic fibrosis severity. Monocyte-derived and tissue-resident-like alveolar macrophages from patients with resolving fibrosis expressed the same set of profibrotic genes as patients with progressive fibrosis, including those who died or required lung transplantation for COVID-19. Our findings argue against a distinct reparative phenotype in monocyte-derived alveolar macrophages, highlighting their utility as a biomarker of lung injury and repair and a potential target for therapy.

https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.07.30.551145v1
